Hi, I'm Nicola, and I want to talk to you about translating your Shiny app into multiple
languages. Some of you might be disappointed because when I say multiple languages in Shiny
apps, I'm talking about spoken languages, not programming languages today. Since I'm
basically going to spend the next couple of minutes telling you how annoying it was to
develop a Shiny app in multiple languages, I thought I'd start by telling you why it's
actually a worthwhile thing to do. The vast majority of websites and apps, not just Shiny
apps, are developed in English. The problem with this is that the vast majority of people
don't speak English. Only around 2 in 11 people actually speak English, and that's a large
number of people that automatically exclude from interacting with your Shiny app. Language
selectors are becoming more commonplace in traditional web development, and we want to
make sure that Shiny apps don't get left behind. Having said that, translating Shiny
apps into multiple languages is not that straightforward to do. What I want to talk about today is
some of the small issues that cropped up when we were developing a bilingual Shiny app to
present public data. Translation affects every single component of your Shiny app. Simple
UI elements suddenly became reactive expressions that relied on a user input. There are a couple
of packages out there that help you to automate the translation process, but what we found
is that those packages typically only work for a few of the most widely spoken languages,
and that their built-in dictionaries typically didn't include domain-specific terms. So when
we were developing our bilingual app, we built the translation capabilities directly into
the app itself. And during the development process, there were a couple of seemingly
small problems that suddenly became much bigger problems to face. And one of those problems
was what we thought was easy, ordering a factor for a bar chart. Most of you have probably
come across the fact that R, in the absence of other instructions, will automatically
sort your character vectors and your factors alphabetically. However, this doesn't always
make sense. So in this example here, we have age group encodings as character strings,
and we might want to sort them from young to old because that's easier for a user to
interpret. So for a single language, this is really easy, right? We just create a factor
and we explicitly set the factor level. And we get a nicely ordered bar chart. The problem
is that when we start doing this with multiple languages, it's not quite so easy. First of
all, we can't rely on this alphabetical ordering at all anymore. If we sort character vector
in one language and we sort it in another, actually they're still in different orders
now. So we can't rely on alphabetical ordering at all. We also don't want to have to manually
specify factor levels for all languages. It's a little bit annoying if you have a few words
in two languages, but if you have hundreds or thousands of words in multiple languages,
it's just completely unmanageable. So to solve this problem for our app, what we did was
we ended up using a sort of default or primary language for everything related to data processing.
So in our case, we did everything in English and we explicitly set these factor levels
in English only. For our bar chart example, what that meant was essentially creating two
different functions. One function to compute the break point for the x axis. Again, this
is done in English only based on our dataset. We then created a second function to compute
the labels based on the output from that breaks function and from the user's choice
of language. Essentially, we wanted to translate as little as possible. So I hope the last
few minutes have convinced you that translating Shiny app, although it's not straightforward,
it is a very useful and worthwhile thing to do. What we found our sort of biggest lesson
was that when we were building this app, translation was always the first problem that we actually
had to think about if we wanted to add something new. But to keep our app actually efficient,
it was always the last one. So I hope it's been useful. Find me on Twitter if you want
to ask questions.